couple of years ago Harvard Business
School chose the best business model of
that year
it chose Somali piracy pretty much
around the same time I discovered that
there were 544 seafarers being held
hostage on ships often anchored just off
the Somali coast in plain sight and I
learned these two facts and I thought
what's going on in shipping and I
thought would that happen in any other
industry would we see 544 airline pilots
held captive in their jumbo jets on a
runway for months or a year would we see
544 Greyhound bus drivers it wouldn't
happen so I started to get intrigued and
I discovered another fact which to me
was more astonishing almost for the fact
that I hadn't known it before the age of
40 to 43
that's how fundamentally we still depend
on shipping because perhaps the general
public thinks of shipping is an
old-fashioned industry something brought
by sail boat with Moby Dick's and Jack
Sparrow's but shipping isn't that
shipping is as crucial to us as it has
ever been shipping brings us 90 percent
of world trade shipping has quadrupled
in size since 1970 we are more dependent
on it now than ever and yet for such an
enormous industry there are a hundred
thousand working vessels on the sea it's
become pretty much invisible now that
sounds absurd in Singapore to say that
because here shipping is so present that
you've stuck a ship on top of a hotel
but elsewhere in the world if you ask
the general public what they know about
shipping and how much trade is carried
by sea
you will get essentially a blank face
you will ask someone on the street if
they've heard of Microsoft I should
think they'll say yes because they'll
know that they make software that goes
on computers and occasionally works and
but if you ask them if they've heard of
masks I doubt you'd get the same
response
even though masks which is just one
shipping company amongst many has
revenues pretty much on a par with
Microsoft now why is this a few years
ago the first see Lord of the British
Admiralty he is called the First Sea
Lord although the chief of the army is
not called a land Lord he said that we
Anna he meant in industrialized nations
in in the West that we suffer from sea
blindness we are blind to the sea as a
place of Industry or of work it's just
something we fly over a patch of blue on
an airline map nothing to see move along
so I wanted to open my own eyes to my
own sea blindness so I ran away to see a
couple of years ago I took a passage on
the murska Kendal mid-sized container
ship carrying nearly 7,000 boxes and I
departed from Felixstowe in on south
coast of England and I ended up right
here in Singapore five weeks later
considerably less jet-lagged than I am
right now and it was a revelation we
traveled through five seas two oceans
nine ports and I learnt a lot about
shipping and one of the first things
that surprised me when I got on board
Kendal was where are all the people I
have friends in the Navy who tell me
they sail with a thousand sailors at a
time but on Kendall there were only 21
crew
now that's because shipping is very
efficient containerization has made it
very efficient ships have automation now
they can operate with small crews but it
also means that in the words of a port
chaplain I once met the average Seafarer
you're going to find on a container ship
is either tired or exhausted because the
pace of modern shipping is quite
punishing for what the ship includes its
human element a strange phrase which
they don't seem to realize sounds a
little bit inhuman
so most seafarers now working on
container ships often have less than two
hours in port at a time they don't have
time to relax there at sea for months at
a time and even when they're on board
they don't have access to what at five
year old would take for granted the
internet and another thing that
surprised me when I got on board Kendal
was who I was sitting next to not the
Queen I can't imagine why they put me
underneath her portrait but around that
dining table in the offices saloon I was
sitting next to a Burmese guy I was
opposite of Romanian Amal Davian an
Indian on the next table was a Chinese
guy and in the other in the crew room it
was entirely Filipino so that was a
normal working ship now how is that
possible because the biggest dramatic
change in shipping over the last 60
years when most of the general public
stopped noticing it was something called
an open registry or a flag of
convenience ships can now fly the flag
of any nation that provides the flag
registry you can get a flag from the
landlocked nation of Bolivia or Mongolia
or North Korea though that's not very
popular so we have these very
multinational global mobile crews on
ships and that was a surprise to me and
when we got to pirate waters down the
bab-el-mandeb Strait and into the Indian
Ocean the ship changed and that was also
shocking because suddenly I realized as
the captain said to me that I had been
crazy to choose to go through pirate
water
on a container ship we were no longer
allowed on deck there were double pirate
watches and at that time there were
those 544 seafarers being held hostage
and some of them were held hostage for
years because of the nature of shipping
and the flag of convenience not all of
them but some of them were because for
the minority of unscrupulous ship owners
it can be easy to hide behind the
anonymity offered by some flags of
convenience what else does our sea
blindness mask well if you go out to sea
on a ship or on a cruise ship and look
up to the funnel you'll see very black
smoke and that's because shipping has
very tight margins and they want cheap
fuel so they use something called bunker
fuel which was described to me by
someone in the tanker industry as the
dregs of the refinery or just one step
up from asphalt a shipping is the
greenest method of transport in terms of
carbon emissions per turn per mile
it emits about a thousandth of aviation
and about a tenth of trucking but it's
not benign because there's so much of it
so shipping emissions are about three to
four percent almost the same as
Aviation's and if he put shipping
emissions on it on a list of the
country's carbon emissions it would come
in about six somewhere near Germany it
was calculated in 2009 that the 15
largest ships pollute in terms of
particles and soot and noxious gases as
much as all the cars in the world and
the good news is that people are now
talking about sustainable shipping there
are interesting initiatives going on but
why is it taken so long when are we
going to start to talking and thinking
about shipping miles as well as air
miles I also traveled to Cape Cod to
look at the plight of the North Atlantic
right whale because this to me was one
of the most surprising things about my
time at sea and what it made me think
about we know about man's impacts on the
ocean in terms of fishing and
overfishing but we don't really know
much about what's happening underneath
the water and in fact shipping has a
role to play here
because shipping noise has contributed
to damaging the acoustic habitats of
ocean creatures light doesn't penetrate
beneath the surface of the water so
ocean creatures like whales and dolphins
and even 800 species of fish communicate
by sound and a North Atlantic right
whale can transmit again across hundreds
of miles a humpback can transmit a sound
across a whole ocean but a supertanker
can also be heard coming across a whole
ocean and because the noise that
propellers make underwater is sometimes
at the same frequency that whales use
then it can damage their acoustic
habitat and they need this for breeding
for finding feeding grounds for finding
mates and the acoustic habitats of the
North Atlantic right whale has been
reduced by up to 90% but there are no
laws governing acoustic pollution yet
and when I arrived in Singapore and I
apologize for this but I didn't want to
get off my ship I'd really loved being
onboard Kendal I'd been well treated by
the crew I'd had a garrulous and
entertaining captain and I would happily
have signed up for another five weeks
something that the captain also said it
was crazy to think about but I wasn't
there for nine months at a time like the
Filipino seafarers who when I asked them
to describe their job to me called it
dollar for homesickness they had good
salaries but theirs is still an
isolating and difficult life on a
dangerous and often difficult element
but when I get to this third I'm in two
minds because I want to salute those
seafarers who bring us 90 percent of
everything and get very little thanks or
recognition for it I want to salute the
hundred thousand ships that are at sea
they're doing that work coming in and
out every day bringing us what we need
but I also want to see shipping and us
the general public who know so little
about it to have a bit more scrutiny to
be a bit more transparent to have 90%
transparency because I think we could
benefit from doing something very simple
which is learning to see the sea thank
you
[Applause]
[Music]